lastly we want to look at mixed strategy
in ash equilibrium when players have a
continuum of actions available and this
is particularly important if there is no
pure strategy in ash equilibrium such as
in the three player hotel in game
now to walk you through the ideas behind
how we find these nash equilibria
i want to start with an example that is
simpler than the three-player hotel in
game i want to start with a
bertrand competition among two players
in a bertrand competition
two competing firms compete on prices
rather than quantities and the typical
example would be
two gas stations now we've already
argued through the hoteling model that
gas stations always set up shop next to
each other so the only thing that we
consider when we go to a gas station
given that they are at the same location
is which one has the lower price
and we will then go to whichever gas
station
has a lower price and we will suppose
that all the customers do that
and there's a unit demand of customers
and the caveat here is that each gas
station has only enough capacity has
only enough gas to serve two thirds of
the demand
now for simplest for simplicity of
notation we'll assume that both
gas stations have the same unit cost
normalized to zero
now the cost in reality is not zero but
we could then simply replace
the interval of prices that the players
can choose by setting it to the
um
the cost the unit cost then the upper
bound is standard unit cost plus some
constant
and the reason why there is an upper
bound to the prices that the players can
set
is so that we have existence of a nash
equilibrium from the
from the unmasking
but in reality
nobody is willing to pay an infinite
amount right so there will be some upper
bound where we just say well i don't use
cars anymore so there's a natural upper
bound where
that exceeds the willingness to pay off
customers
now what do the payoffs look like in
this example here well
okay if
both gas stations choose the same price
they will each serve half of the
customers so they get half times
the price at which they sell the gas
if they have a lower price they will get
to serve two thirds of the demand which
is their capacity
at their price and if they choose the
higher price they can serve one third of
the demand
and like i mentioned
in this example we can apply
the theorem by das gupta and masking
because
the
sum of utilities is upper semicontinuous
and the discontinued discontinuities in
each
gas station's utility function are
sufficiently nice for the theorem to
apply
now let's see
first why there exists no pure strategy
nash equilibrium
so if we draw
so if we fix a
price set by the second gas station and
then we draw the best or the utility
function that
the first gas station gets in any
response we'll get these images here so
if we choose
the same price as the other
gas station
then we simply serve half the demand and
so
the utility rate will be half of the
price that we choose
if we choose anything less
then we serve two thirds of the demand
so here we have a slope
two thirds and anything above we have a
slope of one-third
and we see that
if we decide
to sell one
to sell at a price one
then we'll always only serve one-third
of demand but we'll always
earn the maximal price that we can earn
so we will always get one third
if we choose one
and is that a best response well it
depends if
the other gas station chooses
efficiently low price
then we will this will be a best
response but if they choose a higher
price or a sufficiently high price then
it would be a better response to
undercut the price by the other company
slightly
so there was some threshold in between
where
choosing one
is no longer a best response because
there is a better response but no best
response
so if we look at the best response
correspondence then we can figure out
that the cutoff will be one half
so
for any
price set by the competition below one
half our best response will be one
and if they set the price above one half
there's no best response
now
verifying consistency in this case is
rather easy the only possible best
response is one
but if one of the companies sets their
price equal to one the other one does
not have the best response so there is
no pure strategy nash equilibrium
this means we want to look at
mixed strategies now in this example
the strategy space is an interval
and in general if we have
a an interval or a one-dimensional
set of strategies available we can
represent mixed strategies or
distributions through a distribution
function
and so let me
go a little bit in detail about
distribution functions so we will have
an easier time finding these mixed
strategy nash equilibrium
so in general a distribution function is
a function with three properties
it's always non-decreasing
because
we will always measure the probability
of a larger set right if x increases
then
this is a more likely event so it cannot
decrease as x increases
then it's right continuous
right continuous means similar to upper
semicontinuity or lower semi-continuity
it means here that the limit point as we
approach
a discontinuity
from the right is the same as the
function value at that point
the reason why it's right continuous is
because we have a weak inequality here
this means that at this point we include
all the probability
with which
the random variable x takes exactly that
value
and then lastly
the distribution function starts at zero
so if you go sufficiently far to the
left it will be zero and if it goes
sufficiently far to the right it will be
one
now these two conditions together with
monotonicity imply that any value in
between also has values between zero and
one
now if we look at a distribution
function it might look something like
this it must not be continuous or it
it's possible that it's not continuous
and at a discontinuity
well what is a discontinuity the left
limit here
is
the probability
that x is strictly smaller than x
the function value
is the probability that it's
less than or equal to x so the
difference here is precisely the
probability with which the random
variable is equal to this value x
and in terms of the distribution
function we can write this probability
as
the difference between the distribution
function which is the value here
minus its left limit
and we use this notation here f x minus
to indicate the left limit at x
and the left limit always exists because
we have monotonicity
and we call it discontinuity in a
distribution function an atom
and
an atom is precisely a point that can be
reached or that can be
realized with positive probability all
the others are realized with probability
0 because if the left limit is equal to
the function value
then the probability with which x is
equal to exactly one value will then be
zero
now there are two special cases of
distribution functions which with which
you are quite familiar
the first one is
continuous distribution functions
which all admit a density function
so the density function is essentially
the derivative of the distribution
function
and we can use the density function to
well
compute
the probability that a value is smaller
equal than x simply by integrating it
from minus infinity to x
or more usefully actually to compute the
expected value of any function of the
random variable x
so we multiply
each possible value that can be realized
with its density with which the with
which it is realized
and so the interpretation of a density
here is that
in a continuous random variable each
value
has is realized with probability zero
but the density function here shows us
how the relative likelihood between two
possible values changes so for example
this cell here is twice as likely as
this value here because the density is
twice as high that's why in the
expectation we value
or we count
we weigh this value here or the function
at this point twice as high as whatever
g of x the value takes at this point
here
now another
special case that you're all familiar
with are discrete random variables as if
we roll a die or we throw a coin or
something like that
and for discrete random variables we
have a
probability mass function
so in that case
there are a few
possible outcomes that all have a
positive probability like if we roll a
die then the outcomes 1 through 6 are
all possible with probability 1 6.
and so here these green bars here
indicate the probability mass functions
and are precisely
the probability with which this
this value is realized which is the
difference or this the size of the
discontinuity of the distribution
function
now for those
discrete random variables we can compute
the expected value of g of x
by
again weighing each possible outcome
with the probability with which it
happens
now which of the two should we use for
mixed strategies
the answer unfortunately is neither
because the mixed strategy is endogenous
it's chosen by the players and so we
cannot really restrict the players to
choose
a mixed strategy with a density or to
choose a mixed strategy that that is
discrete um
since it's the player's free choice they
could choose anything that is neither
continuous nor nor discrete
now this is different from
if we have exogenous random events if we
have exogenous random events in our
model then we typically want to assume
they have a density function because
that will make the model nicer
the reason why it's not okay to assume
it for
for the player's behavior is because
it's endogenous and it's hard to verify
whether it's satisfied in practice
if somebody tells you oh and we assume
that you will mix with a density
function then
how can you make sure that this is
really a valid assumption whereas if it
is for exogenous variables let's say the
rainfall is distributed according to
this density
then
this is something we can test because we
have data detested
so in
general the players will choose a mixed
strategy will
or a mixed strategy will have both
components we'll have continuous
components and discontinuous components
but the good news is that
general random variables are not that
different from discrete or continuous so
here
we can look at the discontinuous part so
we can look at all the values that
happen with positive probability at all
the atoms of the distribution function
so here df are all discontinuities of f
so those are all the atoms
and
atom x
happens with probability p of x which is
the size of the discontinuity
then if we subtract the discontinuities
from the distribution function what we
are left with is a continuous function
which admits a density
and
so we can decompose any distribution
function into a continuous part with a
density and a discontinuous compound
this continuous part with a probability
mass function
and if we compute the expected value of
a
random variable or a function of a
random variable then well the way that
we would write it down is we would write
it as
the integral over g of x times df of x
so df here simply means
the rate at which the prop at which the
distribution function changes
and the rate at which it changes is
either the probability mass function if
there is an atom
or the density function if there is no
atom
and so
really in general a distribution
function is just given by a continuous
and the discontinuous random variable we
just add them both together
now let's go back
to our example and let's go back to
mixed strategies what does this mean for
mixed strategies well we can decompose a
mixed strategy into its atoms so those
are those actions that are chosen with
positive probability
and then all the remaining actions which
are chosen with probability zero
but for those we can specify a density
which tells us you know the relative
likelihood with which the other actions
are chosen
so here
this action here it looks like it's
about two-thirds is chosen with
probability
forty percent
and then with 60
some other outcome is chosen and the
density specifies all the other outcomes
are chosen with equal likelihood
now what does the best response here
look like of
the
first gas station well if we
compute the expected utility then we'll
get something like this and we see
we still have a discontinuity
and
as a consequence the best response
correspondence is still empty
this shouldn't come as a surprise
because
the whole problem here
why pure strategy equilibrium did not
exist this are these discontinuities and
the discontinuities don't disappear if
the distribu if the mixed strategy still
has atoms because
the the relevant part here is that
if
firm 2 chooses this value here with
positive probability then there's always
a positive value of undercutting
so if
we don't have a pure surge in ash
equilibrium then most often we can only
get a mixed nash equilibrium that is
actually atomless
so most often
we will find
a mixed nash equilibrium with a density
function
now
i want to solve this example in two ways
i want to solve this example first
without assuming anything about the
distribution
and see how we can
find the equilibrium and then
i want to start with some educated guess
about what the equilibrium could look
like and then verify that it is an
equilibrium
so first
to simplify
the notation or actually to make it
tractable we want to look at symmetric
nash equilibria why is this a good idea
well
if we have if both gas stations choose
the same mixed strategy
then we will have fewer degrees of
freedom so we only have one
distribution function to find instead of
two so that's always a good starting
point
and then
in a mixed strategy
players have to be indifferent between
all the possible values in the support
between all the values that can be
realized and so we want to use the
indifference principle for any
point for any price in the support of
the mixed strategy
all right let's assume
player 2 plays according to this mixed
strategy f
and
we now want to use the indifference
principle
to find some condition on f and the
difference principle tells us any price
in the support
has to yield the same utility to
the first gas station
so the first step here will be to
calculate the expected utility so
well we serve two thirds
of the demand
if we choose a lower price
we serve half the demand if we choose
the same price and a third of demand if
we choose a larger price
and now we can express these
probabilities
using the distribution function
so
this one here is that
p2 is strictly larger than p1 so this is
1 minus the distribution function
then
here
we know that this is the size of the
discontinuity at p1
and then here this will be
the probability that p2 is strictly
smaller than p1 so this is the left
limit
of
the distribution function
right so one minus probability that's
larger the size of the discontinuity the
probability that it's equal and then the
left limit the probability that it's
strictly smaller than p one
now we can combine some terms here so
here we see we have two minus two thirds
f plus one half f so this means that
we're left with minus one sixth
p
f
then also here we see we have one third
the left limit minus one half times the
left limit so we get um
so it simplifies to these expressions
now this is the expected uot for utility
for any p1 in the support and we know
that they all have to be the same
so they all have to be equal to some
constant and
to actually simplify this let's say this
is a constant k
third so we can multiply everything by
three and get rid of some of these
denominators
then if we solve
the resulting equation so
k over 3 is equal to this we multiply
both
sides by 3
and then solve for this expression here
this is the quantity that we get
now why do i solve for one half times
the distribution function plus this left
limit well
because at any point that is not an atom
i will get precisely the distribution
function here on the left hand side
because if there's no atom if there's no
discontinuity then the left limit is
equal to the function value
so this is summarized here at the
continuity point of the distribution
function the distribution function has
to take this value
what about added discontinuity okay from
the previous slide at a discontinuity
this has to be satisfied
but then we can use the fact that at the
left limit so as we approach
this price p1 as we approach
discontinuity from the left we approach
it continuously because left limits
exist so for all those points where we
approach
p1
we can use the form that we have already
derived so we'll look at the limit as we
come
and approach p1 from the left
but now this function here
over which we take the limit is
continuous so we take the limit by
simply plugging in
p1 and
this is the expression that we obtain
and it has the same solution
so even at a discontinuity it has the
same value in particular it does not
have a discontinuity
so this indeed an atomless distribution
so we're almost there
we know what the distribution function
looks like on its support
but we don't know yet what the support
is
but we do know one thing about the
support we know that at the upper end
point so the largest possible price
that players are willing to choose
the distribution function is one
so let's denote by p bar
this largest point in the support
the distribution function is 1
which means that
p bar has to be equal to k so that this
term here is 1 and then 2 minus 1 is 1.
so k is exactly equal to p bar
let's plug this in in the expected
utility
so at p bar one
well it's in the support so
we will get k third that's how we chose
k so this is p bar third
now we have argued previously that
we can always get one third if we choose
one
so if p bar was anything less than one
then there would be a profitable
deviation to choose 1 instead
right so we know that we can always get
1 by choosing p1 and we can always get 1
3 by choosing
price 1
so it's not possible that p bar is
smaller than 1 so p bar has to be one
so we are mixing all the way up to the
largest possible price
so this means that k is also equal to
one and so now we know the distribution
function on its entire support
we don't know yet what the lower bound
of the support is well
this function here
will get
smaller and smaller
the smaller p1 gets and at some point it
will become negative which is not
possible so this means that the lower
bound of the support must be where the
function is zero and we can solve this
to be one half
and so
the symmetric mixed strategy nash
equilibrium takes the following value
here or the
list of the following mixing
probabilities
and
the expected utility is constant as it
has to be in its entire support and then
below it it's simply
with slope two-thirds
then what's the
the mixing probability well
if we want to display the density then
we take the derivative
and
um
it'll be the following one so we
actually assign
much more weight to two smaller prices
and then decreases quadratically to
um
i think that's probably around 1 8.
so
not too bad we were able to find it it
was a little bit tricky with the left
limits and things like that
so now let's think about a different way
how we can solve it that might be
somewhat simpler
and to do that let's compare
the support here of the mixed nash
equilibrium
to some of the
um pure strategy best responses
um
so here this is actually
the wrong way so there are none if the
pui is
larger than one half
so
but from
the pure strategy
best response analysis we know that the
only possible best response is one
and one is indeed the upper limit of the
support and then in the entire region
where there is no
um
pure strategy best response is
essentially where we have to mix
so whenever there is no
um
no best response in pure strategies is
where we find the mixed equilibrium and
we might have been able to guess this
so we could have guessed that the
distribution function is atomless
because we argued that
most likely it will be atomless
because for any atom will still have a
downward discontinuity and we could have
guessed that the upper bound of the
support is one
because
that's the only possible pure strategy
best response
so now
if this was our guess
how much faster would the derivation
have been well let's see
if we compute the expected utility
well if it's atomless then one term will
not appear which is
where we choose the same
price as our competitor because that
happens with probability zero if it's
atomless
and also the left limit will not appear
separately because if it's atomless the
left limit is equal to the function
value
all right this equation is much simpler
we can immediately solve it for fp and
immediately get that this is the
function value
and if we guess the upper bound of the
support is one then again we plug in one
here and we obtain k is one and we're
done
so
verifying
a mixed nash equilibrium can be very
quick if we have a good idea what it
could be and in many cases we have a
good idea when there is no pure strategy
nash equilibrium we have a guess that is
animals and
sometimes we have a guess about what the
support could be
so two approaches to finding strategy
nash equilibria the first one
was the one on slides
53-55 we start with the general
distribution function we will see a
difference principle for every pure
action the support and then we have to
characterize the distribution function
separately for atoms and non-atoms and
hopefully find that there are no atoms
then
we
plug in an unknown
upper bound of the support where the
distribution function is equal to one
and then hopefully get some expression
for distribution function now this
approach here
works
only for very few examples i only know
two examples for which it works so
nicely one of them you've already seen
the other one will be in in an
assignment um
the other approach
works more generally the problem is that
we need a good guess for it
so guess
the support
justify
that it could be atomless and then we
simply use the indifference principle
for this guest support
and then we have to verify the end then
it is in the international equilibrium
and this approach works surprisingly
well it sounds maybe
you know guessing sounds not like a very
good recipe but let's go back to
the three vendors on the beach
what could our best guess be well
there's only one possible choice
where two players set up shop for which
the best response correspondence of the
third player is continuous
and this is if the two players um play
one fourth and three
a one fourth
and three quarters
and
so we could have a guess that this is
the support
moreover we can guess that
that it will be atomless
because the discontinuities were a big
problem
and so we can assume that
the strategy admits a density function
on this interval and then see if we can
find a mixed generation equilibrium
and the reason why
here it's
important to
assume the density function or and not
just the distribution function is
because we can't calculate the expected
utilities only from the distribution
function without the density
and it turns out that this is true it
turns out that there is such a mixed
strategy nash equilibrium and if you
want you can
try to find it as practice
good
so this week we've looked at nash
equilibria
the most important solution concept in
game theory but
i didn't choose it as the main concept
of this week's class
and this shows how important really
mutual best responses are
so
if players are rational and their
conjectures are correct
then they will play mutual best
responses
and we can find those
by finding the best response
correspondence for the different
different players and then verifying
consistency
the reason why i think this is more
important than nash equilibrium is
because nash equilibrium is only one
special case it's only
the neutral best responses in a static
game with complete information
but all the other equilibria that we
will look at will also be mutual best
responses so
the single most important concept in the
entire class is finding these best
response correspondences and verifying
the consistency
now some other concepts that we've seen
the indifference principle again
and
it can be useful in two
ways
it can be useful if we have a given
strategy profile and we want to verify
that it is an equilibrium
and it can be very helpful to find mixed
strategy in ash equilibrium in games
where players have a continuum of
actions
now
i want to emphasize
what is the most important part about
this week's class
it's finding nash equilibria in finite
games
and when we have concave utilities this
will be the case that happens way most
by far the most frequently and it's the
one that you absolutely need to know
then even though this video here i spent
a lot of time talking about make
strategy nash equilibria it's really
only relevant if you go for that a plus
um
yeah so really
the most important parts are finding ash
equivalent if players have finitely many
actions concrete utilities or a
combination one player has finitely many
the other one has concrete futilities
good
no questions about this video either but
some additional
literature
a lot of this was about probability
theory and so i thought i'll give you
two references for probability
klenke is a good introductory textbook
and they just had a third edition last
year
and then callenberg is sort of the the
reference work if you ever do research
in probability that's the book you want
to look at and again there was just a
new edition this year
and then
the
the other
literatures or hotelings game again then
shocket actually
solved um
the or found the mixture of gina clear
in the hotel in game
but the approach how to find it without
guessing it is extremely difficult so
you can have a look at the paper if you
want to see how he does it
and then i took the example of the
bertrand competition from lecture notes
by azu osterglass
good
that's it
for this week's videos and
i'll see you on wednesday in class